Yeah, as users and developers of open source software, we get to stand on the shoulders
of giants. That means we can build on the work of others to build something really epic,
maybe like this human pyramid on water skis. But there's a danger that the picture can
look a little bit different, maybe like this famous XKCD cartoon, where we have this towering
jumble of blocks that is balanced precariously on one small piece that represents a project
some random person in Nebraska has been thanklessly maintaining since 2003. I'm sure some of
you, many of you have seen this before. And large open source projects like R or Python
tend to fall somewhere between these two pictures. And I'm going to be focusing in this talk
on R. So if we think about the R Project, we have a small team of core developers that
maintain the code base that is distributed as R. So this is about 20 people, and only
one of them is working full time on R development, most squeezing this into or alongside their
regular jobs as academics or data scientists. Beyond that, we have a slightly larger group
of external contributors that also contribute to the code base, but on a more ad hoc basis.
And beyond that, we have the massive community of R users and developers that are using and
building on base R, but not necessarily contributing back to the core project. And of course, for
R to be sustainable, we do need people to contribute back in some way to the core project.
And I'm going to be talking about different ways you can do that. So why should you care?
Well, hopefully you agree with me that R is special, right? It's great. It has the state
of the art statistical methods. You can use it for your full data pipeline. It's a user
friendly language, and it has a great community. And many of you use it. Maybe you don't necessarily
realize that you're using base R, but if you're using Tidyverse or Shiny, of course, that's
all relying on the core code base. And you've invested time and money, and you don't want
that time and money that you invested in skills and the development of code to go to waste.
And finally, R needs your help, like any open source project. Just as an indicator, it has
over 600 open bugs on its bug tracker. I also sort of slightly alluded to this demographic
cliff that we're facing. So R is a 30 year old project. Many of the core developers are
near or even beyond the end of their careers. You know, they've retired now, officially.
And it's also acknowledged that there's a lack of diversity. So it'd be great to work
on this at the same time as we're thinking about bringing new people in. And what have
I got to do with it? Well, I'm a similar vintage to Colin. I started using R in 2001, in my
PhD. And I've worked in academia, in pharma, as a freelancer. And in all these roles, R
has been fundamental to my work. A few years ago, I went back to academia to take up a
research software engineering fellowship, where I'm focusing on this issue of sustainability
and diversity and inclusion in the R projects. And in relation to the R projects, I made
my first contribution to base R in 2004, my first real job after the PhD. And as part
of that job, I was developing a CRAN package. So that was my first CRAN package in 2005.
And over time, I got more involved in the R community. And 2015, I was elected as an
R Foundation member. And as one of my tasks on the R Foundation, I co-founded FORWARDS,
which is the task force for underrepresented groups in the R community. And then in 2020,
I started the R Contribution Working Group, with the aim of fostering a larger and more
diverse community of contributors to R. So there are many ways that you can contribute.
And it will take some combination of skill, time and money. And I'm going to be using
these icons to give an indicator of the relative skill, time and money that it will take to
get started in the different ways that I mentioned. So I'm not going to go over in detail, but
you'll see the symbols on the slides. There's also lots of links that you can follow to
get more information about all the things I talk about. And there'll be a QR code at
the end, so you can grab a copy of my slides and get all those links.
Okay, so the first way is the sort of the obvious way, contributing to the code base
itself. But the code base doesn't just include R code. All right, it includes text, the messages,
warnings and errors that you see when you're using R, includes documentation, the R help
files, but also the R manuals. So the help files are in RD format, the manuals are written
in a thing called tech info. And then there's code, but it's not just R code. There's a
huge amount of C code in base R, and there's also other languages like Fortran and Bash.
So many of you will have skills that you can potentially contribute here. So in terms of
text, the main way that you can contribute here is in translating the text from English
to other languages. And for this, we have a weblaid interface that provides a browser
interface where you can step through the messages that need translation in a particular language.
So in the example here, we're looking at messages in the R files, the stats package, and we're
looking at translating those to Spanish. So you'll see the message that's the original
English and underneath there'll be a blank box if there's no translation, or there might
be an existing translation that needs a view. And so as a contributor, you can add the translation
or update the translation, save and continue. And those contributions that you make will
eventually be pulled together and added to. If you want to contribute to documentation,
fixing a typo or making a small improvement to the documentation, you can use the GitHub
mirror. So R itself is maintained in subversion, but there's a mirror of the source code on
GitHub. So you can go over there. It's the RSVN repo on GitHub, and you can find the
source file. So this is the source file for the help on multi-non. And click on the pencil
icons edit file, which you can do all through the browser, and it will open a fork of the
product for you. You can make your change, then you can make a pull request back to the
repo. And from that, you can create a patch file that you can submit to R-Core for consideration.
You can contribute to the code in a very similar way, but with code, it's a little
bit more complicated. You might want to edit more than one file. And if you're working
on an internal function or compiled code, then you'll want to rebuild R in order to
see the change. And so for this, we can instead use the R dev container. So this is a virtual
environment that you can launch through GitHub Codespaces. It has a VS Code IDE. So you can
get a copy in here of the R sources, open the files that you want to edit. So here I've
got the source file for the ask yes, no function. So it's an R script. And I'm just going to
make a simple change here. So one of the options is one of the default choices that this function
gives is yes. So the options are yes, no, or cancel. And I'm going to change yes to
oh yeah. So there we are. I've done it. You can see the old line that has yes. You can
see the new line that has oh yeah. And this is using VS Code's version control features.
So we can see the change. At the moment, I've just changed the source file. But staying
in the dev container, I can rebuild R. And then I can run my function with the change.
And I can see if it's worked as expected in an example. So you might not, I don't know,
hopefully some of you can read that. So we can see that when I call the ask yes, no function,
I now get oh yeah as one of the options that I should give. So this allows us to test changes
and develop bug fixes, for example, in the code or the documentation that we would like
to propose to R. If you head to the contributor.r-project.org website, you'll find information on a range
of support for people that want to contribute to R. So we have a Slack group. We have the
R development guide, which is an ebook targeted at people new to contribution covering a lot
of the information that you'll need to know. We also have slides and video tutorials. And
we also have sort of live help. So we have monthly office hours in two different time
zones. It can drop in and ask for help on getting started or if you've started to work
on a bug fix or something and you want to discuss it. And we also started to organize
R Dev Days as such nights to conferences. And we'll be having a small group alongside
the Tidyverse Dev Day on Thursday. And we have a few spaces left if anybody would like
to join us then. So beyond contributing to the code base, there are other ways that you
can contribute your experience and expertise. One way is testing R before release. So you
may know that R has a major release once a year around April time. A couple of weeks
before that, there'll be a pre-release version that is available on the R project website.
And you can help by testing your own programs and workflows, your special ways of installing
or setting up R, things that interact with external libraries or interactive R packages.
In other words, things that are pretty tricky for the small core team to test themselves.
And if you find any issues and report those back, you know, maybe they can get fixed before
the official release. But it's not too late to report issues, of course, after the release.
And it's really helpful for anybody to report any issue you find on the bug tracker to help
maintain R to a high standard. So both bug reports and wishlist items, sort of feature
requests, can be posted on R's Bugzilla. And it's really helpful if you're reporting a
bug to include a minimal reproducible example, which many of you will be familiar with. But
in R, it's particularly helpful to restrict yourself to the base R packages and data.
So it's clear that it really is an issue with base R, and it can be easily reproduced without
any add-on packages. If you've got a little bit more experience and time, then you can
also help by reviewing bug reports. For example, you can help by trying to reproduce the bug
in different versions of R or in different operating systems, different graphical devices.
You might be able to simplify the reprex as another step towards analyzing the root cause,
or you might be the one that helps find the root cause. You know, the few lines of R code
or C where the bug is actually happening. And then you can discuss with others whether
this is something that actually needs fixing and how to fix it. So it helps to have people
contribute to that discussion rather than it just being one person having to think about
this. You can also contribute your expertise via a working group. So I've also already
briefly mentioned the R Contribution Working Group and FWDs. The R Consortium also runs
a number of working groups, and some of these relate to core development or core infrastructure.
So I mentioned a few of them here. There's one on thinking about how to implement multilingual
R documentation. So in other words, having R files, R help files in different languages.
There's one that's been working for a number of years on the R7 package, which is a potential
successor to S3 and S4 classes and methods in R. And there's the R Repositories Working
Group, which thinks about how to support CRAN and the development of new package repositories
for the community. And finally, I'd like to mention contributing financially. So far,
the contributions have mainly been contributing your time and skill, but of course, money
is also useful. So how can you do that? If you're an organization, the most obvious way
is through the R Consortium, which was basically set up to help businesses support the R ecosystem.
And it has a number of membership levels for different sized businesses. And this funding
goes towards key infrastructure projects and community conferences and meetups, which have
been a real boost to the R community. So this is a really valuable contribution.
There's also the R Foundation, which I've also briefly mentioned. This is the nonprofit
organization that was set up a long time ago to support R. This works on a bit of a smaller
scale, but it also has institutional memberships, starting from just €250 a year. But of course,
if you want to contribute more, that's also welcome. And that would also be recognized.
So the highest level is to be a patron with unspecified monetary amounts, and they're
very happy to say that the deposit is a patron of the R Foundation. And this money goes towards
funding things that the R projects and the R Foundation are involved in. So some support
for R Core, CRAN, the R Journal, the UseR! Conference, and things like the R Dev Days.
And both the R Foundation and our consortium work together as well.
So for example, they jointly fund one of the R Core members at the moment.
But you can also contribute as an individual. So the easiest way to do this is through the
R Foundation, which has an individual membership level, or you can make a one-off donation
of the amount of your choice. We also have an open collective. This was mainly set up
to receive money from Google Season of Docs. But you can also contribute to that. And that
funding goes towards small projects, such as maintenance of the R Development Guide,
or the UseR! Info Board that tracks all the information about past UseR! conferences to help
future organizers. So in summary, then, there are quite a number of ways actually
that have a low barrier to entry. Message translation, documentation fixes, testing R,
reporting bugs, making an individual donation. If you have a little bit more time and expertise,
then you can get into working on code fixes, reviewing bugs, or contributing to a working
group. And probably the highest barrier is making an institution-level donation. But this makes a
lot of sense if your institution is relying heavily on R and wants to make sure it's
sustainable for the long term. So here's the QR code I mentioned, which we're taking to these
slides, and all the links. There's another page after this that is just all the links on one page,
so you don't necessarily have to go all through the slides again unless you find that helpful.
And so thank you very much.
We do have time for a couple questions.
We have, who comes up with the R version names and how can we submit some suggestions?
Okay, so yeah, so you might have seen these quirky nicknames for the R versions, and it's
Peter Dalgard, one of the R core members that come up with these names, and they're based on the
Peanuts cartoons. I don't know if he takes suggestions, but yeah, maybe you would have
to email Peter. He's at the University of Copenhagen, I think, so you could probably
find him online, Peter. And then one more, are there any particular types of contribution the
R core team actively looking for right now? And so some of those things I mentioned are
things that the R core have particularly asked for, like testing R before release,
helping to review bugs. These are things that they've written about on the R blog,
so that's another way you can sort of follow what's happening in the project.
And they do engage with these activities like the R Dev Day, so we try and find things that
have R core support, so you've got a good chance of your contributions being accepted.
Awesome, thank you so much.